I'm very happy to be here
my name is Russell Targ and I'm a
physicist and it's my great pleasure to
tell you about the remarkable work we
did at Stanford Research Institute
investigating psychic abilities we did
that for the CIA defense intelligence
agency NASA and many many other
intelligence agencies part of the US
government intelligence system I got
into all this as a childhood magician
standing on the stage in New York doing
mental magic and I had the experience
from time to time of having a direct
perception of something in the
lifestream of the person whose mind I
was pretending to read or whose fortune
I was prepared
pretending to tell so I was not a real
psychic I was just a kid doing magic but
I've now talked to people like Kreskin
and Melbourne Christopher and they said
oh yes every professional magician knows
that from time to time you're given some
material and you can then supplement
your magic trick with whatever ESP comes
to you and there many magicians who do
that as we know but I was not doing
magic for the CIA
because mean as we know the CIA is not
easily amused and we were trying to do
the real thing for them the work we did
at SR I involved things like finding a
downed Russian airplane in North Africa
with code books on it locating a
kidnapped American general in northern
Italy looking into a Soviet weapons
Factory in Soviet Siberia describing the
construction of a huge Soviet submarine
in northern Russia and we even looked in
on us so and I Chinese atomic bomb test
three days before it was scheduled to go
off and described directly that it was
going to fail so we did quite a lot of
useful things for the government during
our 23 year program the ability we're
talking about is a natural psychic
ability that we all have
spite of what you may have heard to the
contrary people can quiet their mind and
describe an experience what's happening
at a distant place or in the future and
this has been talked about for thousands
of years Buddhist Buddhists have a vast
lore about what this is and how to do it
and why it's desirable and I'll try and
talk about that later the ability allows
you to quiet your mind and describe and
experience what's happening in the
future and you can do that independent
of the distance the most interesting
thing that we found as physicists is
that is no harder to describe what's
happening in Soviet Siberia 6,000 miles
away that is for you to describe the
funny object I have in my pocket 6,000
miles away does not decrease the
accuracy or the reliability as compared
with something nearby looking into the
distance is no harder than looking at a
contemporaneous event and that's why
this is called a non-local perception
not quantum mechanical particularly it
pertains to the fact that we live in a
non-local space-time
described as scientifically recent most
reasonably by Schrodinger in the 1920s
and then proved in the 1970s 1980s so
the idea of non-local connections is not
new age this is accepted in the physical
community the hottest topic in modern
physics is exploring nonlocality
it was described originally by the
Buddhists 2,000 years ago but modern
physics has finally caught up the
leaders of the program that we had at s
RI
are all physicists the physicists are
taking over what used to be called
parapsychology all the three leaders of
the program were myself in it and helped
put off who are both laser physicists
and Ed Bay who the nuclear physicist and
we were eager that our scientific
friends would not think that we gone off
the rails into ESP research so we made
sure that we published everything we did
all of our experiment
in the world's most prestigious journals
where we would normally publish our
science so we published our work in the
Proceedings of the Institute of
Electrical Engineers the American
Association for the Advancement of
science the American Institute of
Physics and nature magazine so this is
that I just want to emphasize that at
the time we were doing this work this
was mainstream written up in the New
York Times published in the premier
journals in the world and I want to give
you an idea of where I was when this all
began in the 1960s I was a hardcore
laser guy and Here I am standing in
front of a thousand watt carbon dioxide
laser at my most maverick a self I'm
trying to convince the government that I
indeed a thousand watts coming out of
this one meter package you see I've got
a little meter bar there government
thought it's impossible because their
lasers were a hundred times bigger than
mine so I had a thousand watts over
something a meter long they thought that
is impossible so it's like a repressive
what I was going to do ten years later
trying to convince the government that
some other impossible thing actually
happened so in this case the idea is
that I have a big fire break I'm going
to drill a hole right through it and
then hand the skeptical government
scientists this big grip brick with a
red-hot hole right drilled through it
and I asked him do you want fries with
that or and eventually they supported
our program they could deny the fire
brick with a hole today we would
consider that kind of thing a paranormal
object there's no way to create a
red-hot hole with the fire breakers in
it's not flammable so that's what I had
done that was my career I've been in
laser I was a laser pioneer as working
with lasers many years before there were
any lasers so this was the outgrowth of
my earliest studies in graduate school
so the question that led to that my
recent book I wrote
with a provocative subtitle a physicist
proof of psychic abilities and the idea
is that proof is evidence so strong that
you can't statistically a reasonably
deny it that's what we mean by proof you
can't prove scientific things in the
laboratory the way you prove
mathematical theorems you prove things
in the laboratory by piling up so much
evidence that assembly unreasonable to
deny it so here we are in our laboratory
there's passed price in the middle Pat
price was one of our great great
psychics he was police commissioner
Burbank and retired he's playing here
with an ESP teaching machine there was a
basis of our first NASA program my idea
was can you offer feedback and
reinforcement and help people improve
their psychic ability with a little
random game where you have to guess
which picture will be illuminated the
answer is yes you can learn in the great
good news for you today is that game is
now available they free application for
your iPhone so I posted that and a
little gift it's called ESP trainer and
you can just download it and have it on
your iPhone or ring a bell when you get
the right answer and show you a pretty
picture
so that's Pat price price was an
extraordinary psychic he lived in a
psychic bubble he was an inspiration for
me as to what ESP looks like in an
evolved person we were once called by
the Berkeley Police Department where
Patricia Hearst was kidnapped and they
said we're so desperate can you help us
with your ESP program shows how
desperate they were and Pat price and
help what often I drove to Berkeley and
price said let's see your mug book who
don't on cents guy had been lots of
police station I want to see the picture
book with all the usual suspects he
turned the page page after page and said
that's the guy that's the ringleader and
he put his finger on Donald of Ruiz who
was indeed the ringleader extraordinary
but they learned that only two weeks
later the police said well can you tell
something right now that will help us
and price it would you like to know
where the kidnap car is they said you're
kidding
their will so if you drive about 50
miles north on Bayshore free on Highway
101 the kidnap car is a white station
wagons on the right parked by a diner
across from two large white gas storage
cylinders in the pedestrian overpass
across the freeway and one of the
detectives said well I know where that
is
that's on my way to my home in Vallejo
20 minutes later they had found the car
and there are still cartridges rolling
around on the floor of the car that's as
close to magic as I've ever seen in my
20 years in the laboratory and the other
folks there are Bob Monroe who wrote
about journeys out of the body how to go
from remote viewing to an out-of-body
experience but that's outside our
schedule for today and I'm on the right
forty years ago and what that shows is
that if you live long enough you got to
do a lot of interesting things so this
is the first in a series of experiments
we did over a course of a decade and
it's basically what convinced the CIA to
give us money that is a what we played
they kind of psychic hide-and-go-seek
and all the pictures I'm going to show
you are like this I won't reiterate the
way it works is path price or the
psychic of the day then a shielded ruh
electrically shielded room with me and
how randomly is is sent to an
undisclosed location random target
picked by the lab director he generally
will go with the colonel from the Army
or a lab director or contract monitor in
this case they went to a swimming pool
complex called Rincon on a park priced
with me said I see a water purification
plant I see a square pool 65 by 80 and
around 400 feet in diameter and to water
storage tanks that's what I see and
that's what he drew on the right
actually they had gone to the swimming
pool complex and when we got there
for feedback after the experiment we saw
the swimming pool is really a hundred
and ten feet in diameter and the
rectangular pool is 75 by 100 so viewed
from five miles away he had the
dimensions architectural e correct to
90% now he had added in these two water
tanks which are on the right side of the
picture which are not at the location
and it's not a water purification plant
a swimming pool however and that's the
story I would tell - about ten years ago
when the city of Palo Alto sent us a
picture book showing what the city used
to be like seventy five and a hundred
years ago seventy five years those
psychic ones know all the what the
answer is going to be already
seventy-five years ago this was a water
purification plant and the tallest thing
in the city of Palo Alto were the two
water tanks they show at the top then
price drew at the left so what he
apparently did is move his awareness
five miles south on middlefield Road and
described the park where the guys were
hiding and then moved to the wareness
seventy-five years back to describe the
biggest thing of the city off my
schedule I got to tell you he also
described a national security agency
code facility in Virginia and he
described that with able to read the
file folders and people wanted to know
why did you pick this to read and he
said well the more in psychic space the
more you hide something the brighter it
shines so let that be warning to anybody
who's having an affair
so the demonstration of ability test
that we had from the CIA John McMahon
who's head of the CIA said to us you
guys are wasting your time looking at
swimming pools and churches we have
targets that would be of national
security
now help can you describe a target and
I'll send you the coordinates so price
and I climb back into our little
shielded phone booth and he said well
I'm psychically laying on a building and
a giant crane is rolling back and forth
over my body there's a huge crane it has
eight wheels four on either side of the
building and in this building they're
constructing a 60-foot steel sphere and
they're welding it together that all
turned out to be entirely true in fact
it was so true that after the steel
sphere was verified we then had a
congressional investigation called by
the House Intelligence Oversight
Committee to see if there had been a
security leak this in the spirit of no
good deed goes unpunished
but but the Congress eventually said
what we're doing is okay we were
supported by CIA and Defense
Intelligence Agency and told to press on
and we pressed on for another 15 years
another experiment that I'll show you
because of the particular interest to me
is that he'll put off then went to
travel I was the interviewer through all
of these my visions very porous he
probably caught on so I don't drive and
he'll was always the outbound person and
I was a stay-at-home psychic travel
agent working with the person working
with the person trying to elicit a
description of the distant place so this
time he'll was on a business and
pleasure trip to Colombia South America
and each day price sitting with me would
describe I see a church I see a volcano
to the harbor to the market and on day
five he didn't show up so the spirit of
the show must go on I said well I'll
describe it I've never
remote-viewing before but i'd
interviewed countless countless psychics
and other visitors so I knew that I knew
the moves so I said well this is rust
argh remote-viewing a path price price
isn't here when I close my eyes I see
something it looks like an airport on an
island
there's ocean at the end of the runway
there's sand and grass on the right at
an airport building on the left that's
what I get and that's where he was he
was on an island Airport off the coast
of Colombia called San Andreas my great
coincidence of the day as I was driving
here I was talking to the cab driver he
was fum from san Andreas and gave me a
color photograph of the airport on the
island how that was my lucky day
I don't I don't claim that's ESP that
that's what you call a lucky day I
finally escaped from the laboratory and
got the travel cross-country and two
other people were psychically tracking
me the first place I went was New
Orleans and no one knew of course where
I was and I chose my target by throwing
a dye on the pavement and the dye came
out sent me to the New Orleans Superdome
so I was sitting and standing in front
of the Superdome recording my
coordinates this is noon the Russell
Targ I'm standing for the Superdome it
looked like a flying saucer shining in
the Sun bad thing to say back in the
laboratory
my friend other physicist Gary Lang Ford
very psychic straight up physicist was
working with Elizabeth rauscher who
interviewed him she another physicist
all these people are professional
physicists interested in psychic stuff
gary said well I have a clear picture of
a circular building it looks like a
giant UFO do you think Russell has been
abducted
so Elizabeth had just tell me what you
see make a drawing and of course his
drawing with a remarkably accurate
this was his also first remote viewing
Gary just got came in and said like I've
been doing this all my life have
occasionally that's how I was an analyst
looking at photo analysts looking at
specs of buildings and describing what's
inside so he was experienced to look at
fuzzy images but here we just took away
the image but it didn't interfere with
his ability at all our great pleasure
was then to have this army intelligence
asked us to Train to set up a psychic
army core something like in the men who
stare at goats but not quite we didn't
know goats were killed in our program
but we chose six army officers to work
with us from a big big group that we
interviewed hell and I interviewed one
of those with Joe mcmoneagle who Joe is
still alive and is probably the greatest
living psychic today prodigious psychic
and his first trial sitting with me
what's this remote viewing stuff all of
these people are basically tough army
officers showed up in their boots and
leather jackets and their patches and
their backpacks
what's the psychic stuff what do you
want me to do betting their careers that
there's a new interesting juncture for
them so I described remote viewing as I
always do I've been doing workshops now
for 20 years my my ritual the Shibboleth
is close your eyes quite your mind and
describes the surprising pictures that
look at appearing your awareness
don't try and name it don't try and
guess just describe the surprising
images and that language was understood
1200 years ago it appears that Patanjali
is guide self-liberation for seeing with
naked awareness if you want to move from
suffering and condition awareness to
freedom and naked awareness sit down and
shut up
and quiet your mind stop naming stop
guessing and you're on your way so
that's what I'm still still telling
people following the twelve hundred year
old guide boy as a author it's very nice
for me to see a book still in print
twelve hundred years later because it
gives me courage that my books will be
around so Joe drew this picture he said
I stare at he and his colonel his
colonel went with help hood off and
jokes that I see a building with stripes
in front and a long portion behind a
little fountain he drew what was there
and of course the judges had no problem
matching that with our six army officers
I'll describe later his six people had
never done this before
I had them each do six trials a week and
we had each one so we had thirty for six
weeks so we had 36 trials you'd expect
them to get six first place matches by
chance we had nineteen first place
matches and they set up the psychic Army
Corps and ran another 15 years
they had 30 people on the East Coast
working in tandem with the SSRI group so
this is hella Hammad the funny story
with her hello is my dear friend for two
decades before the SSRI program and they
said well a path price of a fantastic
psychic Ingo Swann is the one who taught
us how to do remote viewing we want to
see what a control person is CIA said
what what is an ordinary person do well
hell is not exactly ordinary she the
woman of the world speaks many languages
professional photographer but she
thought it would be very amusing to be
hired as a psychic of the various thing
that she had done in her life so she
came to work with us the bottom line is
she became the most proficient and most
reliable person in the program for the
decade our control subject her first
trial with me as you catch on now we're
sitting in a shielded room
hello says when I close my eyes what
comes in my view is squares within
squares within squares that's what he'll
put off sees and he was at a pedestrian
overpass hellas nine trials were even
more significant than Pat prices nine
trials in prices the judge guessed seven
of them first place match what that
means is that if he'll put off had been
separated had been kidnapped ninety nine
times in a row price would have found
him
seven out of the nine times the first
place he looked very remarkable
so here's hella Hamid and Ingo Swann
Ingo taught us all how to do remote
viewing the way it work is that Ingo
taught Helen me how to do remote viewing
hell and I taught the six army officers
the army officers taught the world so if
you look at Google right now we're still
up on Google and search for remote
viewing you'll find more than two
million pages dealing with remote
viewing operational you things to do
with remote viewing two million pages
there's quite a lot of pages for
something that many people don't think
exists so at the end of the decade risen
for showing this as people get better in
remote viewing there's no decline effect
so at the end of the decade we're still
doing experiments with hella with the
kind of technophobe she can change the
batteries in her light meter but she's a
non-technical person she finds physics
is very amusing in their own worldly
ways but but in this experiment we gave
her the coordinates for this Inlet ax in
binary form someone was concerned that
maybe she'd memorize the globe so we
gave her the coordinates one zero zero
one one oh one zero West one one
something north she said well that's a
pretty pattern what comes to mind is a
bellybutton shaped energy expander this
is the this year photography artists
bellybutton the target is the Berkeley
bevatron which is indeed of energy
expander and she drew this middle
drawing with the four beam tubes coming
out of it going to a target building and
the bellybutton shape
the bevatron and the picture from the
laboratory is shown on the left now I've
been looking at this picture for a
decade and it occurred to me as I'm
writing my current book that my opinion
see everything I told you up to now is
true my opinion on this picture is that
she wasn't actually looking at the sight
which is a big mass of concrete and
steel but she was looking ten minutes
ahead at her feedback picture because
her drawing is anomalously accurate to
the picture that we showed her later
time so she was really cheating here she
wasn't looking she wasn't looking at the
berkeley bevatron instead she just
looked ahead a few minutes to see what
we're going to show her for feedback and
during that process she said this is
such a complicated thing I can't grasp
but I want to make it out of clay so
this is her clay model of the bevatron
with the hole in it with a circular
particle beam for beam tubes and target
building 50 miles to north she
absolutely had never seen a bevatron
before and of course the people
interviewing her had no idea what the
target was so how do we evaluate these
things the effect size is a measure of
the power of the experiment you're doing
not necessary this statistic called
significance you can inflate your
statistics by doing millions and
millions of trials the effect size takes
out the fact that you've done millions
of trials and how powerful is this
experiment so the idea of proof is that
when the government was doing tests the
NIH was doing tests to see if aspirin
helped men avoid heart attacks they did
this experiment and eventually the thing
had such a large effect size they
stopped the experiment because they
didn't want to deprive the poor controls
of the benefit of the aspirin got it the
effect size was so high they stopped the
experiment the effect side got all the
way up to 0.06 and here's the NIH report
with the effect size is 0.06 standard
patience all of our experiments exceed
that by a factor of 10 so the NIH thinks
that this is my little argument for
proof if the NIH things that they have
proven that all of you should be taking
aspirin and the experiment is so strong
you got to stop it and give aspirin to
the poor controls that's what they mean
by proof stop the experiment is proven
our FX size is 10 times what they had so
in our experiments we did with path
price we're a significant at odds of
almost 100 million more than that one or
a hundred thousand his significant
effect size was more than ten times the
NIH so this by itself is an experiment
more than one a hundred thousand in
hella Hamid's experiments it was even
more significant than Pat prices
experiments even though she was a
control subject the army people which is
sort of my pride and joy in that we just
brought in six guys taught him to do
remote viewing and they did
astonishingly well effect size again ten
times the aspirin experiment and it was
working with the army people that led me
on a career of doing work shopping for
the past decade traveling around just
teaching people to do remote viewing on
Google you will find many many people
teaching you to do remote viewing they
all can teach you to do remote viewing
remote viewing is easy to do I have a
chapter in my book where it describes if
you work with a friend you can quickly
both become psychic Remote View is a
natural ability you don't have to eat
porridge at the feet of your guru or pay
anybody thousands of dollars this is a
natural ability like vision or hearing
psychic abilities are not sacred their
abilities they allow you to experience
all kinds of remarkable things and I'll
talk about that in a moment but here all
these guys highly psychic at the end of
our program right after I left I formed
a little organization called Delfy
associates we were using remote
to forecast silver futures working with
an experienced remote viewer we did nine
forecasts whether the silver is going to
go up a little up a lot down a little
down a lot
all nine forecasts were correct we made
$120,000 which is a lot of money in the
1980s and we're on the front page of The
Wall Street Journal BBC horizon Nova
made a film about us in the 1980s ESP
still existed and there are now many
many organization the groups of people
using this associative remote viewing
which is invented by my friend Steven
Schwartz it's a way of even though you
can't read psychic way it's a way of
making substitute items for what you
want to know I can't explain that you
have to read my book has a chapter on
the associative remote viewing which is
the easy guide to investing in the
market you do not have to give away your
mind to be psychic that's not required
you can be discerning and be psychic I
recommend that so you have to decide now
I've given you a sample of what we did
during the first decade of SSRI we did
experiments for the government we did
operational things finding all sorts of
we look even looked in on the American
hostages in Iran successor described
that one was going to be evacuated
because of illness so you have to decide
is the statistical evidence from our
experiments that s RI strong enough to
make you think that something like ESP
really exists exists or do you think it
was just our lucky day and we were
successful in fooling the American
intelligence establishment for 23 years
and lived to tell the tale so you get to
decide which of those is more likely now
you can use remote viewing these days to
find your car keys we just had an
example of using them wrong viewing and
not finding the car keys and that
happens also you can find a parking
place even in Los Angeles and we
were exemplary successful doing that
yesterday so you can find your car keys
find a parking place you can make money
in the stock market in my opinion is is
the most important thing you can do with
remote doing is discover who you are now
it's important for me to tell you that
remote view is not a spiritual path but
if you learn to quiet your mind and move
your awareness into timeless awareness
you are likely to begin to experience
things that surprised you give you
another view of reality for example if
you look in the mirror in the morning
and think that who you see in that
mirror is who you really are you're in
for a lot of suffering in my experience
my opinion is that who you really are is
non-local awareness independent of space
and time you are that awareness that
allows you to move your experience to
move your consciousness to move your
perception anywhere in the world
independent of space and time and this
was described in great detail as I
mentioned by the great Buddhist teacher
Padma Sai Baba in the 8th century where
he said you have to give up your desire
to name things and grasp onto them and
guess what they are because in the
universe is really empty of names as you
may have noticed but you can give up
your desire to defend your ego and what
it says on your business card in
conditioned awareness and if you think
that you may not be made entirely of
meat and potatoes then you can move your
awareness into naked awareness
experience the universe as it is and
find a transcendent way to experience
all the world my invitation for you is
to explore this transcendent place and
then the scientist next year you can
come back and tell us what you
experienced hey thank you
you
[Applause]